add developer documentation about environment setup (#51)
colcon/colcon.readthedocs.org: developer/environment.rst

Environment setup
=================

Using a package after it has been built or building a package on top of its dependencies might require updating environment variables.

> For the former case it is desired to provide a script to perform the environment update to the user for ease of use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the former, the best option for the user is to have a script perform the environment update for ease of use.
```
Not sure if this changes the meaning

> For the latter case it is a necessity to automate the process in order to build packages in topological order without user interaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the latter case, automating the process is necessary to build packages in topological order without user interaction.
```

> E.g. if a package installs an executable which should be invokable by name the containing directory needs to be part of the ``PATH`` environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
E.g. if a package installs an executable which should be invocable by name, the directory containing the executable needs to be part of the ``PATH`` environment variable.
```

Entry points
------------

To update environment variables:

* On non-Windows platforms a shell script needs to be ``source``-ed (e.g. ``.sh``, ``.bash``, ``.zsh``)
* On Windows a shell script needs to be ``call``-ed (e.g. ``.bat``, ``.ps1``)

.. note::

>     An executable is unable to change the environment of the current shell.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Executables are unable to change the environment of the current shell.
```

    Therefore this needs to be done from a shell script.

Package-level
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For each built package ``colcon`` generates a set of package-level scripts (one for each supported shell type): ``share/<package_name>/package.<ext>``.
These script files update the environment with information specific to this package.

``colcon`` supports multiple different approaches to update environment variables:

* A heuristic checking the installed files for known file types or known destinations.
  A few of the supported heuristics:

  * An executable under ``bin`` adds that directory to the ``PATH``
  * An existing Python library directory adds that directory to the ``PYTHONPATH``
  * A file ending in ``-config.cmake`` or ``Config.cmake`` adds the directory to the ``CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH`` (provided by ``colcon-cmake``)
  * A file starting with ``Find`` and ending in ``.cmake`` adds the directory to the ``CMAKE_MODULE_PATH`` (provided by ``colcon-cmake``)
  * A shared library adds the directory to one of the following environment variables (depending on the platform): ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH``, ``DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH``, ``PATH`` (provided by ``colcon-library-path``)

>   * A file ending in ``.pc`` in a directory ``lib/pkgconfig`` adds the directory to the ``PKG_CONFIG_PATH`` (provided by ``colcon-pkg-config``)

Reviewer 2: This is immensely helpful, thanks for this in particular.

* Specific package types providing their own scripts to setup the package specific environment.
  E.g. ``ament_cmake`` packages (supported by ``colcon-ros``) provide a file named ``share/<package_name>/local_setup.<ext>``.

Workspace-level
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> In the root of the install prefix path two kinds of scripts are being generated by ``colcon``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the root of the install prefix path, ``colcon`` generates two kinds of scripts :
```

* ``local_setup.<ext>``: updates the environment with information from all packages installed under this prefix path.
  Since package-level scripts rely on information from their dependencies the package-level scripts must be invoked in topological order.

>   In order to determine the topological order of all packages under the prefix path ``colcon`` stores all run dependencies of a package in a file named ``share/colcon-core/packages/<package_name>``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In order to determine the topological order of all packages under the prefix path, ``colcon`` stores all run dependencies of a package in a file named ``share/colcon-core/packages/<package_name>``.
```

Some environment changes like extending the ``PATH`` are applicable to all shells while others like providing completion functionality are only applicable to some.
If one shell (e.g. ``bash``) provides a superset of functionality and syntax of another shell (e.g. ``sh``) the logic of the ``.sh`` scripts doesn't have to be duplicated for ``bash`` but can be invoked from the package-level setup files.
The latter shell is called a *primary shell*.

Primary shells
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All environment changes necessary to use a package should be expressed in script with the extension of a primary shell.
Primary shell extensions are:

* ``.sh``: plain shell
* ``.bat``: Windows cmd
* ``.ps1``: PowerShell

Non-primary / additional shells
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Other shells which are able to invoke primary shell scripts within their context commonly don't duplicate their content and logic.
Instead they first invoke the primary shell script and then add additional logic to provide specific functionalities like completion.

Avoid duplicate entries
-----------------------

Several environment variables store multiple values separated by a delimiter.

> Commonly duplicate values are not useful and only increase the length and decrease the readability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commonly, duplicate values are not useful and only increase length and decrease readability.
```

> Therefore the shell scripts try to avoid adding duplicate values where applicable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, shell scripts try to avoid adding duplicate values where applicable.
```

  The value is considered to be a path.
  If the value is not an absolute path the prefix path of the ``.dsv`` file is prepended to the value.
  An empty value therefore represents the prefix path.
* ``prepend-non-duplicate-if-exists;<name>;<value>``: Same as ``prepend-non-duplicate`` but only if the path described by the value exists.
* ``set;<name>;<value>``: Set an environment variable ``<name>`` to a value ``<value>``.
  If the value is an existing relative path in the install prefix the install prefix is prepended to the value.
  Otherwise the value is used as is.
* ``set-if-unset;<name>;<value>``: Same as ``set``  but only if the environment variable is not yet set (or empty).
* ``source;<path>``: Source / call another script file ``<path>``.
  If the value is not an absolute path the prefix path of the ``.dsv`` file is prepended.

Implementation
--------------

Implementing the logic to determine the topological order of packages in every primary shell would be a lot of effort and (depending on the shell) cumbersome.

> Also parsing and interpreting ``.dsv`` files would likely not be much faster then invoking the native scripts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also parsing and interpreting ``.dsv`` files would likely not be much faster than invoking the native scripts.
```

Therefore both parts are implemented in a Python script located in the root of the install prefix: ``_local_setup_util_<ext>.py``.

> While the Python script itself can't change the environment it is able to efficiently interpret the operations described by the ``.dsv`` files and generate the shell specific commands necessary to update the environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Python script itself can't change the environment. 
However, it is able to efficiently interpret the operations described by the ``.dsv`` files and generate the shell specific commands necessary to update the environment.
```

> The Python file is templated with information specific to the primary shell it used from hence the ``<ext>`` in the filename.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Python file is templated with information specific to the primary shell it's used from, hence the ``<ext>`` in the filename.
```

> The Python file is templated with information specific to the primary shell it used from hence the ``<ext>`` in the filename.

Reviewer 2: Rationale for templating out multiple instances of the script rather than just passing arguments to one?

Author: The templated approach was just easier to implement. The script logic only needs to take one set of formatting strings into account.

Tracing
-------

> When sourcing / call a workspace-level setup file the number of evaluated scripts and / or interpreted ``.dsv`` files can be significant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When sourcing / calling a workspace-level setup file the number of evaluated scripts and / or interpreted ``.dsv`` files can be significant.
```
